[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, Lisa Garr,
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
Is there a pain that you would
like to heal in your life?
It could be physical pain.
It could be emotional pain.
It could be financial
pain-- any type of pain.
Well, there's a
technique, which is
a combination of ancient
Chinese acupressure
and modern psychology, and it's
called the emotional freedom
technique.
It's also known as tapping.
And it is shown to
significantly alleviate pain.
Well, joining me is Nick Ortner.
He is one of the
foremost experts
on the emotional
freedom technique,
and he is responsible for
bringing this technique
to the masses.
Welcome.
>>NICK ORTNER: Thank you, Lisa.
Thank you.
It's so great to be
here with you today.
>>LISA: It's great
to have you here.
And you really have done so much
to bring this technique out.
I don't know how long--
>>NICK: I'm one of the people
responsible for bringing it
to the masses.
There's a lot of
people, but thank you.
>>LISA: Well, I know you.
How long ago was EFT, or this
whole concept, brought about?
>>NICK: It was
actually 30 years ago.
It's been that long
that it was originally
discovered, this tapping
process, where we're
tapping on endpoints of
meridians on our body by a guy
by the name of Roger Callahan.
He was a traditional
psychologist
working with a client,
struggling with a client, who
had a water phobia, by name of
Mary, and nothing was working.
They were talking--
traditional talk therapy,
looking at the water--
nothing was working.
And when they were
looking at the water,
she says-- this was after a
year and a half of working
on it-- she says, you know,
when I look at that pool,
I get a queasy feeling
in the pit of my stomach.
It so happens, the
night before, he
was reading about the
meridians in the body
and where they ended, and
that the stomach meridian ends
underneath the eye.
So on a whim, he said,
try typing there.
So Mary taps there and the
phobia clears like that.
So he was--
>>LISA: So he wasn't an
acupuncturist or anything, he--
>>NICK: No, he was a
psychologist who was just
looking at Eastern practices.
And with that one case, said,
wow, what happened here?
So he started going deeper.
You can imagine if
you've been practicing
traditional psychology for a
decade, two decades, and all
of a sudden, doing this,
and a water phobia clears,
you've got to look further.
He developed a set of
algorithms or a sequence
where you would do different
tapping for different things.
So if you were angry,
you would do one thing.
If you're anxious,
you would do another.
It was a little
complicated to try
to remember what to do when.
It was kind like you
needed a chart to see.
And then one of the students
by the name of Gary Craig
is the guy who developed
EFT, and that's
the form of tapping I do,
emotional freedom techniques.
And he made it simple.
He said, let's just hit all the
major end points of meridians
every time, no matter what, that
way we can get that down pat,
and then focus on the
rest of the stuff.
>>LISA: End points
of meridians--
I've never heard
it that way before.
This is great.
We're going to go through the
whole history of tapping today.
So how did you find
it in your life?
How did it help you?
>>NICK: Yeah, great question.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>NICK: You know,
probably about a decade
ago now, maybe a
little longer, I
was just online
and, you know, how
you follow one link to
another and read about all
these different techniques.
I had always been into what
could I do for my own life
to make it better?
And I kept reading about
this tapping thing.
And I was skeptical at first.
It's like, why are
we hitting ourselves?
What's happening here?
but I kept hearing
story after story
and everywhere I turn
someone else would say, oh,
have you tried tapping?
And I said, all right, I'm
going to give it a shot.
And one of my first
experiences, I remember,
I had woken up one
morning with neck pain,
like you get a
crick in your neck.
It's not the worst,
but it hurts.
You're kind of like
a robot all day,
cause you can't turn your head.
>>LISA: Slept wrong-- yeah.
>>NICK: Exactly.
And usually, it takes
a day, two days,
sometimes three days
for it to clear.
So I said, you know, I keep
hearing that this tapping thing
works for pain.
Let me try it.
So I pull up the
computer screen,
follow the instructions.
I made sure to close
my blinds to make sure
nobody was watching me--
the neighbors didn't
think I had lost it.
And I'm going
through the points,
going, OK, tapping-- this
pain-- focusing on it.
And next thing I knew it was
just like where did it go?
It's gone.
>>LISA: That fast?
>>NICK: Five or 10 minutes--
max.
>>LISA: Really?
>>NICK: It cleared that fast.
And I've seen that happen
so often with pain.
>>LISA: You hear
it all the time.
So then, how did that
carry on to something
that you actually have helped
thousands of people with?
>>NICK: Yes, so initially,
the first couple of years
was just using it for
myself, with friends,
and family members.
The running joke at
the time was don't
say anything is
wrong around Nick
because he'll make
you tap on it.
And you know me, Lisa, and
I'm a little better now.
Now, I let people come to
me when they want to tap.
But I was just so excited
about the technique.
It was so easy to
implement, so easy to share
with people, and something
they could walk away with.
So it's like, oh, my shoulder
hurts or I'm upset, this, that,
and the other.
Let's try it.
Let's tap on it.
>>LISA: Then you think,
oh, let's do a movie.
>>NICK: Then I did too much
tapping, got a little crazy,
and decided to make a movie.
>>LISA: Did you
tap on the movie?
>>NICK: You know, it's funny,
because we're in LA right now,
filming this, and I was
speaking to a group last night,
and the idea of making
a documentary in LA
isn't that far fetched, because
everybody is making something.
There's film everywhere here.
But I was in Connecticut.
>>LISA: Yeah,
you're right in LA.
>>NICK: And I had no filmmaking
experience, no background
whatsoever in film.
I was just so passionate
about the technique.
And I said, I would
love the medium of film
to actually show
what's happening,
to show that these
results are real,
not just reading about it.
>>LISA: You need to show it.
I'm going to show you
an example of the movie.
This is just explains the
concept of the movie called,
"The Tapping
Solution," take a look.
>>CHERYL RICHARDSON:
What I often say is, OK,
you know what?
I have this little
technique that I think
might really be helpful here.
Now, it might seem
a little strange,
but if you're willing to
play along and work with me,
let's just give it a try
and see what happens.
>>CAROL TUTTLE:
It is a tool that
allows you to release what's
blocking the powers of healing.
>>RICK WILKES: If there is an
emotional trauma, something
happens, something
I watch on CNN,
something that happens
to a friend of mine,
something that
happens to me, there
is an energetic
disruption that occurs.
And what we do is we bring
some soothing to that.
>>DR. FRED GALLO:
You bring a problem
to mind, a trauma for example,
and you tap on your body,
like this.
>>RICK: We do that while tapping
into a particular emotional
state, a feeling in the body.
And by doing that,
we're soothing it.
>>JOE VITALE: When
I first learned
that he was talking
about tapping
on different points on your
body, I think I was skeptical.
But I was also desperate.
>>WOMAN: If I can start to
open up and release some
of these feelings that
I've had in the past
and clear away some experiences
that are no longer relevant.
>>WOMAN: There's no
way I can't change.
I'm just going to get better.
I have to.
There's no possible way.
>>WOMAN: God, I
just have so much
that I need to work on
to kind of save my life.
>>BRAD YATES: I think
it was Thomas Edison who
said, if we did everything we
could, that we are capable of,
we would literally
astound ourselves.
>>JACK CANFIELD:
The problem is we've
been trained out of that
by our conditioning,
by schools, by television.
>>BOB PROCTOR: So I think we got
to take a look at who we are,
and what we've got,
and how we function,
and then begin to
apply this information
in a practical manner to
improve the quality of our life,
because life is
meant to be enjoyed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WOMAN: Four days where
we're going to be in a room
with-- there's 10 of
us, including myself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I come and I go i ebb and I
flow, wherever life takes me,
because I don't really
know if I'm awake
in a dream, if it's
quite what it seems,
or whether I'll see
you in the next scene.
>>NICK: If you could
live your life over,
what would you wish
hadn't happened?
What would you remove?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SINGING) --my home like
right here in the middle.
>>SAM: What have you been
thinking on the way over?
>>MAN: Oh, man, what
haven't I been thinking?
You know, I'm just trying
to get my life back,
you know where it once was.
It'll never be the same
way, but I'm just--
find a way out of this pain.
>>HELENA JOHNSON:
We're going to be
with people who are
going to be helping
us work through
whatever the issues are.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SINGING) Clear a
space in the soul.
Prepare to let go.
Been staring at illusions
now for far too long.
>>SAM: It feels like it's time.
I've been going through
this craziness for years--
seven plus years.
So I'm really excited for
the outcome, to find my life,
find good health.
>>DENNIS: I'm Dennis.
>>SAM: All right.
You my roommate?
>>DENNIS: Yeah, I guess so.
>>SAM: Good man.
I'm Sam.
>>DENNIS: Sam?
>>SAM: Pleasure.
>>DENNIS: Nice to meet you.
This is what you're here for.
And it's time to get rid of what
I call slow incremental growth
and just make a quantum leap
into the full expression
of the brilliance
of who you are,
and everybody has that capacity.
>>LISA: So how did
you find these people
and how many were there?
>>NICK: Yeah, so there was--
when we first started filming
the movie, we just had experts,
and I wanted to go beyond
the experts talking
about how it works.
I wanted to actually show
real, normal people, not even
people in our community,
real people getting results.
So we reached out--
a couple of people
sent out e-mails.
And we had a couple hundred
applicants for these 10 spots.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>NICK: And we picked 10 people
that had challenging issues.
We went for it.
It was Jodi with
fibromyalgia, John
with 30 years of
chronic back pain,
Rene whose wife had died 90
days earlier was suffering from,
not only the grief, but
PTSD from the actual trauma
of the accident.
So all these people
with really difficult
challenges from
around the country.
We spent a week--
it was a whirlwind week where
we'd go to one city one day
and fill them in their
homes and then the next city
and the next city
and the next city,
because we wanted
to capture them
in their home
environments, and see OK,
are they really in pain?
What are they going through?
>>LISA: How do they adjust
their world to their pain?
>>NICK: Exactly.
Exactly.
And then we brought them
for this four day event
where they did the tapping.
>>LISA: And so they stayed
in the house for four days
and you brought the
experts to them.
>>NICK: Exactly.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And we wanted to
create an environment
where it was sort of happening
all at the same time.
They were interacting
with each other.
They were supporting each other.
A lot of magic happened
during those four days.
Beyond the tapping, it was
the community and the support.
And also, when you do
tapping in groups like this,
it's a really
powerful experience.
I often do workshops and speak
in front of live audiences,
bring people up,
and what happens
is that someone comes up
and we're working one-to-one
on an issue, and then someone in
the audience goes, oh my gosh,
I can't believe that's my issue.
I can't believe I haven't
thought about this in 20 years.
But what she's going
through is exactly what
I feel in my heart, and this
person helped me open that up.
So that sort of share
in that community aspect
is a really powerful part
of that tapping process.
>>LISA: I saw you do this
once, and we were at a retreat,
and you pulled a group out,
and it was at the beach.
And you had a circle
of chairs on the sand,
and you were there
through the sunset,
past the sunset.
>>NICK: It was supposed to
be a little demonstration,
but it went right into it.
>>LISA: It went deep.
And you can do
that with tapping.
It gets to the deep issues.
But you have to--
I think, you need to know
which questions to ask.
And that's why an expert
really does help guide you
in the right direction.
But not necessarily.
We'll get to that in a second.
I'm going to have you take
a look at what tapping is.
Take a look here.
>>NICK: There's going to
be three sessions going on
at most times.
One will be up
here, and there will
be practitioner, someone
working, and then
a couple of people watching.
There'll be another one in
a room that's being filmed.
And there's a third one
that's not being filmed.
In terms of what we're
doing, every day,
imagine downloading
100 units of power
or $100 that come into your
energetic bank account.
And you have something happened
when you're 10 years old
and it upsets you and you
have anger towards it.
You take $2 and
you pay that there.
But the problem is
that you don't just
pay that there once,
you pay it every day.
So $2 we can do. $90
gets you through the day.
But what happens is now
you have age 15, $3 here.
Two days ago-- $1 here.
And you end up either
bankrupt or in debt.
And what I like to visualize
is bringing that power back.
So it's going to be, I'd like
my $2 back from that anger,
and we're done with
that transaction,
and now I've got
that back in myself.
>>CAROL LOOK: Where
is your energy going?
It's going where you focus.
So if you're focused on the
fight that you had last week
or you're focused on the meeting
with your boss next week,
that's where your energy is
draining out of your body.
>>CHERYL: When we
get scared or when
we have a trauma, small
trauma, or a large trauma,
often there are blocks
that get created
in the pathways of
that energy system.
>>CAROL: It's just that energy
slows down and feels heavy,
and it contradicts our core true
self, and the natural frequency
we're meant to be at, which
are at those higher levels.
>>JACK: Energy is supposed to
flow through us as a wave form.
It just come in.
The word emotion--
energy in emotion.
And so we say we're
emotionally moved by something.
So when I allow myself to
be moved and feel what it is
and let it pass through me,
then there's no blockages.
>>RICK: As a
massage therapist, I
remember touching a woman's
hip, and she vividly remembering
almost running off a cliff.
Now, this memory had
been stored in her hip
since she was 18,
about 20 years.
And she had blocked it.
And yet, she had, had
constant hip problems.
That hip-- that whole
side of her body, in fact,
she'd always viewed as the
weak side, the side that wasn't
working as well as the other.
Now, when this
memory was released--
the energy of it--
was released from
that side of her body,
her body balanced out.
>>CAROL: There is this circuitry
in the body through which
electricity and energy travels
and connects all our organs.
>>BOB: Now, it's similar to
when you walk into a house.
We've got electrical
switches now
that are activated by
clapping your hands,
or you can flip a switch.
And when we do that,
all the lights go on.
But we don't think
anything of that.
We expect that to happen.
There is an electrical
system in the house.
That's the way the
house is wired.
It's an electrical
system in the body
that's more intricate
than anything in a house.
The electrical
system in the body
would make the electrical
system in a supercomputer
look like an absolute toy.
And we really don't
understand much about it.
>>BRUCE LIPTON: This
becomes relevant.
It says, OK, here's the
physical particles of my body.
Why are they in a healthy
state or why could they
be in a sick state-- that's
the physical expression.
And the answer is,
well, to understand
that, don't look at the body.
You have to understand the
invisible forces in the field.
>>CAROL: I tell people that it's
like gridlock in New York City.
You can't get down Fifth Avenue.
You can't get up 6th Avenue.
You can't get
across 23rd Street,
if you've got blockages in these
circuits and in these pathways.
So we have to clean out the
congestion and the traffic
in order for everything
to be moving cleanly.
>>DAWSON CHURCH: What
happens when a tap at some
point on my body,
especially at one
of those points
of low resistance,
is that a very small
electrical charge
travels through my connective
tissue and my muscles
to other points of my body.
>>RICK: We use these
points in a very
methodical intentional way.
So the Chinese have
been using them how?
Well, they apply pressure--
acupressure.
They apply needles--
acupuncture--
along these different points.
>>DR. NORM SHEALY: So
any physical pressure
creates an electrical current.
And I think that's what we're
doing, is we are exciting
the electrical system.
And the nervous system,
of course, is electrical.
So tapping just initiates
an electrical current.
>>LISA: So now that
we're seeing a little bit
about how it works, what is
some of the science behind it?
How does that work?
>>NICK: Great question.
And there's actually
been more recent research
since the movie was released
that I'm really excited about.
And what the latest
research is really showing
is that when we tap on these
end points of meridians
of our body, we're actually
sending a calming signal
to the amygdala in the brain.
And the amygdala, as
a lot of people know,
is that very ancient fight
or flight response center.
It's the part that,
historically, the tiger chases
you, the amygdala fires,
the blood flows away
from the brain, from
the gut, so we can run.
We can fight, we can flee.
>>LISA: Into the extremities--
OK.
>>NICK: Exactly.
One of the challenges
that we face
in this very modern,
fast-paced life,
is that, that amygdala,
that stress response,
is firing all the time.
And so, you get an email
from your boss at work
and you're sitting
at the computer
and it stresses you
out and there's no
running or fighting or fleeing.
That amygdala is
firing, the chemicals
are coursing through the
body, cortisol is going up,
adrenaline is going up, and we
don't have a way to release it.
In fact, if we have these stress
responses and we went for a run
afterwards-- if we
sprinted right afterwards,
that would be a
good healthy thing,
because that's what our
body would naturally do.
>>LISA: To drain
the chemicals out.
>>NICK: To drain the
chemicals, to actually use
that energy that feels--
that's why people who exercise,
go for a run, they find
it to be a massive stress
reliever, for a good reason.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
>>NICK: And what it's also doing
when we're tapping on these end
points and meridians,
bringing up the stress
response, whether it
be a current stressor
or an old stress, an old trauma,
an old issue that's going on,
we're actually
retraining the brain,
retraining the memory of it.
And that's why we can do it
with veterans with PTSD who
have memories that when
they think about it,
it's not even safe
to think about it.
Their body clenches up.
There's so much pain.
We can retrain that
memory, retrain
how it's stored in the body,
so people can think about it
and go, wow, there's
nothing there.
>>LISA: I was in an car
accident a little while ago
and I noticed that I was
sitting at the same light
that I was rear ended at.
And there was a--
I rolled my windows down--
this was several months later--
a gust of wind came and it
shook the car and my whole body
went immediately into
the accident response.
>>NICK: And that's a conditioned
response in your body.
Now that's at a great specific
one that we can notice--
same thing with
phobias and fears.
If someone has a
real phobia, they
notice that
conditioned response.
But the reality is that,
that conditioned response
is active in virtually
every part of our lives.
So when it comes to
weight loss and food,
that conditioned
responses in place.
>>LISA: How does
that work there?
>>NICK: Well it's the traumas.
It's oftentimes the
traumas that we've
experienced as we grow up.
So let's say-- and everybody's
story is different, but--
I've heard things like
someone was 15 years old
and they were
skinny and in shape
and looking great and
their older sister said,
who do you think you
are looking so hot?
And now it was like,
oh, right there--
body stores it's not
safe to look like this.
So now that conditioned response
is running all the time.
Any time you start
losing weight,
often not a conscious thing,
oh, something doesn't feel good.
It doesn't feel safe.
>>LISA: It's not safe.
>>NICK: Same thing with finances
and standing out in the world.
The conditioned response--
why is it that so many of us
go only so far and then
we just hit a wall and go,
uh-uh, I'm not doing this.
Why is it that--
we talk about self sabotage.
We have a New Year's resolution.
We have something we
want to make happen,
and we make a little
bit of progress,
and then go, no,
I'm not doing it.
>>LISA: So can you
really tap around say,
a New Year's resolution
to keep it active?
>>NICK: Yeah, you
can, absolutely.
It's a great time to do it.
And I was-- defined because
you talked about the questions
before, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>NICK: It's really
about the questions
that we ask ourselves.
And of the ways to do it on
our own is to say, OK, here's
my New Year's resolution.
Let's say it's to
lose 30 pounds.
So you write it down,
whatever you normally do.
Now, the next step is to
imagine it actually happening.
So you close your eyes, you
have a little visualization,
and you say, OK,
let's say in June,
I've actually lost
the 30 pounds.
And really pay attention
to what comes up.
Now, there'll be some good
feelings, like, oh, wow,
I did this.
This is great.
And then if you pay
close attention,
there'll be some
negative feelings.
>>LISA: Look for those.
>>NICK: Look for those.
There'll be things like--
one of things that you can do
is have your family members
and your friends
walk in the room
when you're running that
visualization, not in person,
in that vision.
So you see yourself 30 pounds
lighter in your bathing suit
and now you see all these people
you love walking into the room.
>>LISA: What do they say?
>>NICK: How does that feel?
What do they say?
What's that interaction like?
And people will
very quickly go, oh,
if something doesn't
feel safe about that.
>>LISA: They'll notice
something alarming.
>>NICK: Exactly.
And it's that inquiry process.
Because when we see that--
not only can we actually
tap on that scene,
so we can actually
have the visualization,
and when we feel that
restriction, tap.
We can also ask ourselves the
questions, when did this start?
What's going on here?
Really, what's
underneath this stuff?
>>LISA: Does it
usually always go back
to a childhood memory,
a trauma, something?
>>NICK: So many of
these things do.
They really do.
Not always, sometimes
you'll find something
happened in your 20s
or 30s and everything
was going great until then.
But all too often, and no
matter what the issue is-- we
could be talking about
finances and weight loss
and relationships-- it'll
come back to mom and dad.
It'll come back to the things
that you heard growing up,
the things that you were told,
things that, oftentimes--
there's a lot of negative stuff
and a lot of pain and trauma
and abuse, but there's also
stuff that would seem positive,
but we interpreted
it the wrong way
or we felt too much pressure.
Our parents were
trying to help us out,
but they put a lot
of pressure on us
and now we've applied that
pressure to ourselves.
We can never stop
being a perfectionism.
We can never slow down.
We can never deeply
and completely
love and accept ourselves.
>>LISA: Right.
Well I want to see--
I want to take a look at
what the tapping points are,
so you can learn a
little bit about that.
Take a look.
>>RICK: So let's go
through the points
real quickly, so
that you know what
points we're talking about.
We start with a
karate chop point.
It's along the side of the hand.
And use your fingertips and just
tap on the side of your hand
like that.
We will start here and do a
lot of tapping here while we
make certain statements.
I'm going to talk
about that in a minute.
During the dark
moments of your day,
what might you say about
your immune system?
>>AUDIENCE: It's failing me.
>>RICK: It's failing me.
So what we would say is, even
though my immune system is
failing me right now, I deeply
and completely accept myself.
And we state that three times.
Now, you would then start
tapping on these other points.
And we use what's called
a reminder phrase.
My immune system and all
the ways that it fails me--
I'm just coming up
with something--
my immune system and all
the ways that it fails me.
My immune system and all
Now when you're tapping--
if you were to imagine drumming
on a table and making a noise--
that's about how much
pressure you want to use,
so that you're really
connecting with the bone
underneath the tissue.
You don't have to--
some people really tap
hard thinking that's
going to do a big difference.
It doesn't make that
much difference.
You know, really intense
tapping, that's not necessary.
Some people tap in a circle.
Some people will pat their head.
You just gently tap
the top of the head.
Now it's just about the
center of your head.
So the eyebrow point is at
the beginning of your eyebrow.
And it's on both sides.
So sometimes you can tap
with both hands, one hand.
You can crossover--
doesn't really matter.
Sometimes, I feel like I want
a little more stimulation
and I'll use both hands.
So the next point is
along the side of the eye.
Now it's not so close it makes
you blink and not so far back
that you feel like
you're on your temple.
It's really on the
bone right here.
OK?
Everybody got that?
Under the eye point--
it's a little sensitive, so
you don't want to bang on it
real hard.
But it's right directly
below the pupil
and just tap gently there.
Under the nose.
Now, I curl my lip down a little
bit when I tap under the nose,
cause I want to be able to
make it a little firmer.
It's not necessary.
You all right?
It tickled?
OK.
So try a little firmer--
a little firmer.
Chin-- it's not actually
down on the chin.
They call it the chin point.
It's in the crease here.
And just tap there.
Now the collarbone point--
the collarbone itself--
you have it on both sides.
It's where the whole shoulder
attaches to your body.
So find that bone on
both sides, and then come
down about an inch into the
soft tissue right there.
These are under the arm points.
Now the underarm points is
not way up in the armpit
it's about mid bra line for
women, about hand width.
If you start feeling very
emotional about anything that
comes up, just start tapping.
And then, you're
going to notice--
every once in a while,
you can stop, take a look
at where your
intensity is on that,
and notice that it will shift.
>>LISA: So now that
we know the points
and we know how to do
this and everything,
let's do some tapping
with the audience.
I know that you guys can
follow along at home.
Do this at home.
So what are some of the issues
that you hear the most that
are a source of people's pain?
>>NICK: Yeah, so I sort
of see four big topics.
One is actual physical pain.
Physical pain and sort of
challenges in the body.
They could be other diseases or
other things that are going on
from the physical perspective.
A lot of people
struggle with finances.
And finances not only from
the debt side of things,
but also from the making
more money side of things
and being more fulfilled in
the world side of things.
>>LISA: So breaking
into new realms.
>>NICK: New realms and
really following our--
I think this audience
is looking to see
how can I follow my passion?
How can I actually be
financially successful,
but make a contribution to the
world and be happy doing it?
So that's a big one.
Relationships-- it's huge.
Intimate relationships--
>>LISA: Huge.
>>NICK: Big all the time,
they can dominate our lives
if they're not working well.
And they can also be a source of
incredible enjoyment and love.
>>LISA: If they are.
>>NICK: If they are-- exactly.
And then, weight loss.
It's an ongoing
issue-- really big.
And tapping works
really well with it.
>>LISA: For those that know
tapping and have been immersed
in the world for awhile and
maybe have followed your work
for awhile, what are some
of the advanced levels--
if you were to talk
to that person who's
been working with this
technique for a while,
what are some of the nuances
that you use tapping for?
>>NICK: Well, for myself, I
speak personally in my life,
I use it for procrastination
and for finding balance--
finding balance and clarity.
I think tapping is
so great for clarity.
Because the challenges
that I have now,
I call them
high-quality problems.
It's like, OK, do I say yes
or no to this other speaking
engagement?
Wow, what an
incredible opportunity
you get to reach
these people, but I've
got to be on a
plane for six hours
and do this, that,
and the other.
>>LISA: Take care of your body.
>>NICK: Exactly.
So it's sort of this
internal conflict
of when do I take care of
myself and when do I do this?
And I use tapping to just
gain that clarity on it
and then be able to
make this the decision
from a place of
clarity not impulse,
or not feeling like I need
to do more or I'm not this
or I'm not that.
We often make decisions
from the insecure place.
>>LISA: The over-achiever place.
>>NICK: The
over-achiever replace,
the perfectionist
place, the I've
got to keep doing
this place, and that's
when we hurt ourselves.
That's when we get
run down and we
don't show up in the
world the way we need to.
>>LISA: Well, look
at today's world.
There are opportunities
everywhere.
You can either be
busy with the email.
There's not a second that
someone just sits anymore
and just sits and enjoys.
It's this.
It's looking.
It's the telephone.
It's that the whole time.
>>NICK: Well, and there's and--
if we're trying
to grow a business
or do something in
our professional life,
there's so many opportunities.
It's like, oh, well,
you have to be on here
and do this and do that.
I get yelled at
sometimes by my team
that I'm not doing enough
on Facebook or Twitter.
And oh, did you remember to take
a picture with that superstar
that you had dinner with?
And I'm like, no, I was
having dinner with them.
>>LISA: Yeah, exactly.
>>NICK: It's like, I
forgot, and I don't care.
But that's come from
a place of clarity,
because if we are not
in that grounded place,
we feel like we need
to be doing more.
And that amygdala, that
little stress response
is just firing all the time.
Little tiny stressors
add up in a big way.
>>LISA: So what tapping
has been shown to do
is to really move the
needle on the stress
response in the body.
That is what it is proven to do.
>>NICK: Yeah, in a big way.
And move the needle--
what I love about it is
that when you go deep,
you're moving the needle
not just in that moment.
So I love yoga, for example.
I think it's great.
You go do half an
hour, an hour of yoga,
you feel great afterwards.
But then you go back
to work the next day,
and you need to do it again.
So I'm not putting yoga down.
It's amazing.
Do it.
But when--
>>LISA: It's an hour long class.
>>NICK: It's an hour long class.
But when you do the
tapping, when you
get to the underlying stuff--
and yoga can do that as well.
Yoga can get to the
underlying stuff.
You go deep enough,
you clean stuff up.
But the tapping can very quickly
get to the underlying stuff,
so the stress just doesn't
naturally come up again.
You could be in the same exact
situation at work or at home
with the family.
The external environment
might not have changed,
but you've retrain the
way your mind reacts.
So you can be a zen monk
about the situation,
or just take a
different perspective.
And that's what I've found
has happened in my life
and I've seen it happen
in the lives of thousands
of people around the world.
>>LISA: All right, so can we
do a generic tapping on stress?
>>NICK: Absolutely.
>>LISA: On reducing
stress, I should say.
>>NICK: Yeah.
So if you're watching at
home, what we want to do--
there's a couple simple steps.
One, we want to pick
the target, the thing
that we're working on.
And try to get
specific on one thing.
You can go, even though
I'm really stressed,
and you'll feel
better afterwards,
but then that's sort of like
doing the yoga stretches.
We're not going as
deep as we want to get.
So it is always good to try
to get specific on the issue.
>>LISA: Can we do stress
to boost immunity?
>>NICK: Absolutely.
Well, here's what can happen.
>>LISA: Excuse me.
That immunity.
>>NICK: If you address
the specific events that
are stressing your
immune system,
the body naturally
raises the immunity.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That's what I think
I need to work on.
>>NICK: Well so let
me tell you this.
Let's play with this.
What are some of the
physical symptoms
that you're having right now?
A little bit of congestion and--
>>LISA: A lot of chest
congestion, yeah.
>>NICK: And how strong
is it from zero to 10,
in terms of congestion?
>>LISA: Oh my gosh, if we can
help this, that'd be great.
It's at about an eight.
There's this tickle in my
chest that is tickling me.
>>NICK: OK.
And if there's an emotion in
the chest, what would it be?
>>LISA: Stuck.
>>NICK: And stuck about what?
>>LISA: I think it's just
stuck on needing a break.
Yeah.
>>NICK: So let's just
start tapping on that.
So if you're at
home, what you can do
is pick either
pain in your body,
if you're experiencing it.
Pick some tightness in
your shoulder and tension.
Pick congestion.
Just pick a place where
you're going to focus for now.
You want to use
the same language
that Lisa and I are doing.
And that's OK.
We're going to focus
on her congestion.
But just use the same
language, and you'll
see that the results come up.
>>LISA: Oh, that'd be great.
>>NICK: All right.
So let's see what happens.
Let's play with it.
So tap in the side of the hand.
>>LISA: I'll be your
real-life example right now.
>>NICK: It's the
karate chop point.
One hand or the other, whatever
feels comfortable for you,
and just repeat after me.
Even though I have all this
congestion in my chest--
>>LISA: Even though I have all
this congestion in my chest--
>>NICK: --and the Robitussin
isn't cutting it--
>>LISA: --and the Robitussin
>>NICK: --and I feel so stuck--
>>LISA: --and I feel so stuck.
>>NICK: I need to take a break--
>>LISA: I need to take a break--
>>NICK: --but I can't
find a way to do it.
>>LISA: --but I can't
>>NICK: And I deeply and
completely love and accept
myself--
>>LISA: And I deeply and
completely love and accept
myself--
>>NICK: --even though I have
all this congestion in my chest.
>>LISA: --even though I have
>>NICK: I need to slow down--
>>LISA: I need to slow down--
>>NICK: --but I can't.
>>LISA: --but I can't.
>>NICK: And I don't know why.
>>LISA: And I don't know why.
>>NICK: But I do know why.
>>LISA: But I kind
of do know why.
>>NICK: And I deeply
and completely
love and accept myself.
>>LISA: And I deeply
and completely
love and accept myself.
>>NICK: Even though I have all
this congestion in my chest--
>>LISA: Even though I have all
>>NICK: --I choose to
relax and let it go now.
>>LISA: --I choose to
>>NICK: So tapping
through the point.
Eyebrow point--
inside of the eyebrow,
right where the hair
ends and meets the nose.
One hand or both hands, and
just repeat, this congestion.
>>LISA: This congestion.
>>NICK: Side of the eye, not
at the temple, right next
to the eye.
This congestion in my chest.
>>LISA: This
congestion in my chest.
>>NICK: Under the eye
of this stuck feeling.
>>LISA: This stuck feeling.
>>NICK: Under the nose--
I feel so stuck.
>>LISA: I feel so stuck.
>>NICK: Under the mouth--
because I want to take a break.
>>LISA: Because I
want to take a break.
>>NICK: Collarbone-- just
feel for the two little bones
of the collarbones,
down an inch,
out to each side about an inch--
and I can't.
>>LISA: And I can't.
>>NICK: Underneath the armpit--
three inches underneath
the armpit--
I want to take a break.
>>LISA: I want to take a break.
>>NICK: Top of the
head-- but I just can't.
>>LISA: But I just can't.
>>NICK: And one more round--
eyebrow-- all this congestion.
>>LISA: All this congestion.
>>NICK: Side of the eye--
my chest feels so stuck.
>>LISA: My chest feels so stuck.
>>NICK: Under the
eye-- and I feel stuck.
>>LISA: And I feel stuck.
>>NICK: Under the nose--
I want to take a break.
>>LISA: I want to take a break.
>>NICK: Under the
mouth-- and I just can't.
>>LISA: And I just can't.
>>NICK: Collarbone-- and I
wonder what that's all about?
>>LISA: And I wonder
what that's all about?
>>NICK: Under the arm-- and
what I can do to change that.
>>LISA: And what I
can do to change that.
>>NICK: Top of the
head-- right now.
>>LISA: Right now.
>>NICK: Deep breath.
>>LISA: Wow, that's the
first deep breath I've taken
for a while without coughing.
>>NICK: That's a round of two.
So after a round of
two, check back in.
So zero to 10 on the congestion?
>>LISA: The tickle's not there.
>>NICK: OK.
Tickle's gone.
>>LISA: Tickle's gone.
Why do you reinforce the cough?
>>NICK: Negative-- the cough--
yeah.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>NICK: Well because
we're only doing it
for a short period of time.
People get scared that
we're saying we're angry.
We're saying we're this.
Right now, your
cough is congested,
like your throat is congested.
>>LISA: It's driving me nuts.
>>NICK: There's no
getting around it.
So instead of just
ignoring it, we
acknowledge it for a
short period of time,
say this is how I feel.
This is what's going on.
And then we let it go.
And then we can do
positive affirmations.
We can do my chest feels relax
and clear and all that stuff.
>>LISA: It's so
interesting, because what
happens when you start
coughing and anyone
who's ever gotten a coughing
fit knows it's a reaction.
It's a response.
And it can be exacerbated
by that response.
If you can just break the
response, and it calms down.
>>NICK: And tell me
about the stuck feeling,
because that's what we really
want to get at here right.
And we're not tapping--
we don't want to just
tap on the symptom which
is the congestion, we want
to tap on the stuck feeling,
the reasons why you're having
hard time slowing down.
>>LISA: The thing that
came up, which is perfect,
is that I couldn't take
a breath, just a breath--
just to take a breath.
You know those mornings
when the snow is falling
and you're sipping
a cup of coffee
and you have nothing
to do that day?
>>NICK: Yeah, that's
what you want.
>>LISA: Where'd that day go?
>>NICK: So why
can't you slow down?
What's the part of
you that's stopping--
>>LISA: Over scheduled.
>>NICK: Can't stop?
>>LISA: Over-- not even--
I mean, it's just
over-passionate.
>>NICK: But you're over
scheduled, because--
and look, I suffer
from the same--
>>LISA: Ability to say no.
>>NICK: You've made decisions.
Over scheduling isn't something
that was dumped on you.
>>LISA: No, I made a
choice on all of it.
>>NICK: There's
underlying pattern
with every little
decision that you make.
And we're all faced with this,
with patterns of perfectionism
and over achieving, those
are all little decisions.
That's why you have to get
to the underlying pattern,
the part of you that is
saying yes to those things,
scared to say no.
And there could be--
everyone has different
things going on.
>>LISA: We talked
about this day and age
where there are
opportunities everywhere.
And even those that have a
full-time job, you do something
after work also as a hobby.
I mean, there's always--
there's that permission to slow
down and just check from within
doesn't seem to be
apparent in my life.
>>NICK: So you can tap--
even though I can't say no.
And then you can also
tap as that email comes
in that says, hey, how about
we do this, or this, that,
and the other, you can tap
just even reading the email.
>>LISA: Can we tap on saying no?
>>NICK: Yes, absolutely.
>>LISA: That's exciting to me.
>>NICK: So tell me when you--
so let's get specific
again, because we
don't want to just
use the language,
even though I can't say no.
We want to feel the feeling.
So try to think of the last
time that you wanted to say no
and you didn't.
Can you tune into that?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>NICK: And how do you feel
when that event comes up?
>>LISA: I felt that I would
have been hurting that person's
feelings, that I was going to be
missing something if I said no,
that there was an opportunity
that I might have missed.
Yeah.
>>NICK: And where do you feel
those feelings in your body?
And can you feel them going
forward in the future,
like how they're--
>>LISA: No, I feel them
swirling around in my head--
looping.
Looping.
>>NICK: Yeah.
So let's just play
with that right now.
>>LISA: OK.
>>NICK: So tapping
the side of the hand--
even though I just
can't say no--
>>LISA: Even though
I just can't say no--
>>NICK: --my body can't do it--
>>LISA: --my body can't do it--
>>NICK: --my mind can't do it--
>>LISA: --my mind can't do it--
>>NICK: --I'm
trained to say yes--
>>LISA: --I'm
>>NICK: --and I don't
want to miss out.
>>LISA: --and I don't
>>NICK: I don't want to
hurt anybody feelings.
>>LISA: I don't want to
hurt anybody's feelings.
>>NICK: And it doesn't
feel safe to say no.
>>LISA: It doesn't
>>NICK: And I deeply and
completely love and accept
myself--
>>LISA: And I deeply and
completely love and accept
myself--
>>NICK: --even though
I just can't say no.
>>LISA: --even though
>>NICK: I can't imagine
myself doing it--
>>LISA: I can't imagine
>>NICK: --because
I'm not good at it.
>>LISA: I'm not good at it.
>>NICK: And I deeply
and completely
love and accept myself.
>>LISA: And I'm
deeply and completely
love and accept myself.
>>NICK: Even though I've
been running this pattern--
>>LISA: Even though I've
>>NICK: --of saying yes--
>>LISA: --of saying yes--
>>NICK: --to too many things--
>>LISA: --to too many things--
>>NICK: --for too long--
>>LISA: --for too long--
>>NICK: --and it's
wearing me down.
>>LISA: --and it's
>>NICK: And I'm
paying the price.
>>LISA: And I'm
>>NICK: And I deeply
and completely
love and accept myself.
>>LISA: And I deeply
and completely
love and accept myself.
>>NICK: Eyebrow--
I can't say no.
>>LISA: I can't say no.
>>NICK: Side of the eye--
what if I hurt their feelings?
>>LISA: What if I
hurt their feelings?
>>NICK: Under the eye--
what if I miss out?
>>LISA: What if I miss out?
>>NICK: Under the nose--
I'm scared to miss out.
>>LISA: I'm scared to miss out.
>>NICK: Under the mouth--
I'm scared to hurt
their feelings.
>>LISA: I'm scared to
hurt their feelings.
>>NICK: Collarbone--
can't say no.
>>LISA: Can't say no.
>>NICK: Under the arm--
I just don't know how to do it.
>>LISA: I just don't
know how to do it.
>>NICK: Top of the head--
how do I even do it?
>>LISA: How do I even do it?
>>NICK: Eyebrow--
how do I say no?
>>LISA: How do I say no?
>>NICK: Side of eye-- what
will happen if I say no?
>>LISA: What will
happen if I say no?
>>NICK: Under the
eye-- this fear.
>>LISA: This fear.
>>NICK: Under the
nose-- all these fears.
>>LISA: All these fears.
>>NICK: Under the mouth--
around saying no.
>>LISA: Around saying no.
>>NICK: Collarbone-- and
what that would mean.
>>LISA: And what
that would mean.
>>NICK: Under the
arm-- to myself.
>>LISA: To myself.
>>NICK: Top of the
head-- to them.
>>LISA: To them.
>>NICK: And to my life.
>>LISA: And to my life.
>>NICK: Deep breath.
For time's sake, we're sort of
compressing a few things in.
Spending more time on
this, what I would say
is to tap individually
on the things,
like how will they
feel about it?
That's called one
aspect of the issue.
And so one aspect is
how will they feel?
I don't want to
hurt their feelings.
Another aspect is
what if I miss out?
Another aspect is this.
So when we deconstruct
the issue like that,
that's when we get
really great results
because we handle the whole
issue not just one thing.
>>LISA: A lot of stuff that--
maybe it's just being a
product of the 50s and 60s
of that perfect housewife,
everything has to be perfect
and accepted and said
hello to and yes to.
>>NICK: And again, those
are aspects of the issues.
So what you can do is go
back and ask yourself,
how did I learn these things?
What examples did she show me?
And actually run the vision
of that perfect dinner table,
or what she said to you.
If she said, Lisa, you
know, you have to do x,
or you have to do that.
Whatever it is that she said
to you, whatever you learned,
those are the core issues,
those are the core beliefs
that have created
this challenge now.
>>LISA: Always the
perfect dinner table.
You were right about that.
Let's take a look
at Nick doing this
with other people on stage.
This is a brilliant,
brilliant piece here.
Take a look at this.
>>NICK: I want you to--I want
to just hold the mic with one
hand, and with the other
hand, just tap along.
We're all going to
tap along together.
And I want you to-- just
move at your own pace.
You can look at me
to move if you want.
And I want you to just
actually tell me what happened.
So you're boarding a
plane, leaving a plane?
>>AUDIENCE: We're in flight.
>>NICK: You're what?
>>NICK: Oh, you're in flight.
OK.
So you're in flight,
and what happened?
>>AUDIENCE: A passenger-- well,
I told him to keep his foot in.
The other flight attendant
told him to keep his foot in.
And then, I told him for the
last time to keep his foot in,
that's he's interfering
with my job.
And I went out to the
galley and was preparing
to do some more catering,
and the call sign came on,
so I didn't bother looking down.
I went straight for--
I went straight to do my job.
>>NICK: Yeah.
>>AUDIENCE: And he
intentionally put his foot out
and he tripped me.
And the way I fell, I injured
my arm, my whole left side.
I can no longer fly because I
can't perform the emergency--
And that was my dream.
>>NICK: And how do you feel as
you think about that right now?
What's the emotion
that you're feeling?
>>AUDIENCE: I hurt in my heart.
I've met some beautiful
people in my life since then.
And I just feel that
God has put people
in my life because of it.
And it was just a
sign to slow down.
But what a horrible sign.
>>NICK: Deep breath.
And tune back into the pain
and see if it's shifted at all.
>>AUDIENCE: It's
just in the middle.
>>NICK: It's in the middle?
Zero to 10?
>>AUDIENCE: About a three.
>>NICK: About a three.
Nice.
[APPLAUSE]
Before we-- do you
want to fly again?
Do you want to fly again?
>>AUDIENCE: I would love
to fly again, but I can't.
>>NICK: OK.
You can't right now.
How long did we spend
on this process?
10 minutes maybe?
Your pain went from an eight--
about an eight?
It was an eight I
think, to a three--
just saying.
[LAUGHTER]
[CHEERING]
>>NICK: And here's the thing,
pain is such a great example
of everything that we
work on in our lives,
but it's a very
concrete example,
because here's the thing
that happens with pain.
I know what you're
thinking right now.
You've had this shift, but
there's everything else
that comes with it.
It's what the doctors
have told you.
The fear of it coming back.
There's this whole
life built around pain.
But you can use the
tapping to change all that.
>>LISA: That was you in action,
which is wonderful to see,
and the lady had such
significant changes
in that area.
Now, you were faced
with probably one
of the most difficult things
that I can even imagine,
and for tapping to
come into the arena.
Tell us where your hometown is.
>>NICK: Yes, so I live
in Newtown, Connecticut,
which used to be-- people used
to say, where do you live?
Newtown.
Nobody knew where it was.
Now everybody knows.
It's the site of the tragic
Sandy Hook school shootings.
>>LISA: And where
were you on that day?
>>NICK: I was in town.
I was in town.
I was a few miles away from--
which is just crazy
to think that-- it's
like this horror happening
just a few miles away.
>>LISA: What were you
doing at the time?
I'm sure you remember.
>>NICK: Yeah, it was
a Friday morning.
I was actually-- I was working.
I was heading out--
I was headed out of town to
visit my friend Kris Carr, who
lives in Woodstock,
and we were planning
on spending the
weekend together.
My wife and I we're
going up there.
And we actually, as we were
leaving to go visit her,
is when the news really
got pretty severe,
and we heard the whole
details of what happened.
And then we came
back the next day.
We were back in
town on Saturday.
>>LISA: Oh, so you weren't
there when all of the emergency
vehicles and everything--
>>NICK: Well, we were
leaving late that afternoon,
and then we were back Saturday.
>>LISA: Did you come back
because you realized that there
was such an issue there?
>>NICK: Well, in part, but we
also knew that at that moment,
on that Saturday, I didn't have
a role in what was happening.
There was just other
mechanisms in place that--
>>LISA: Needed to
play itself out.
But you did have an impact
a little bit later on.
About how long afterwards?
>>NICK: Well, I, actually, I
personally started making calls
that Saturday afternoon
to tapping experts
around the planet, people that
I had connected with who I knew
had done humanitarian work.
One in particular,
Dr. Lori Leyden
who had been working in Rwanda
for the previous five years
tapping with genocide
survivors in Rwanda
with children who
had lost her siblings
and their parents in Rwanda.
And it's interesting,
because this
work that I and the
tapping solution company
had been supporting the
previous couple of years.
We were excited about
what she was doing.
And we raised over
$250,000 for her work.
And then, when I called
her-- and she was
in California at the
time-- and I said, look,
here's what we have.
I'm in Newtown.
We've got to do something.
And she flew in that--
she was there by Tuesday.
So just a few days afterwards.
And we established the
Tapping Solution Foundation,
established volunteers.
We've had about 40 volunteers.
We had hundreds of
applications for volunteers.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>NICK: 40 volunteers.
And shortly, a week
after, we were already
working with people,
tapping with people--
with first responders,
with parents
who had lost their children,
with people in the school,
with people in the community--
using this tapping technique
to deal with the stress
and the trauma of the situation
to try to lighten the load.
>>LISA: So first responders--
let's start with those people.
Did you get a hold
of the Red Cross
or the people that were there?
>>NICK: Yeah.
Well, we, actually,
from the beginning,
we were very quiet about
the work we were doing.
It was a situation unlike
any the world has faced.
>>LISA: Ever.
>>NICK: One of the
things that happened
was that there was about
100-200-300 organizations who
all went in to help.
That was their first response.
I read somewhere there were
68,000 Teddy bears sent in.
And so, there was
all this energy.
And we started slowly
working with people,
but this is a new technique and
it's just now being accepted.
There's psychologists
and psychiatrists use it,
but being extra accepted
by the mainstream.
And we don't want
to force our way in.
We knew, and I knew
personally, I live in the town.
I'm not going anywhere.
So we're going to be here.
And what's happened-- we started
working with people right away,
but it's really been
now 11 months later,
where people are coming to us.
Just last weekend,
Lori presented
in front of 100 Connecticut
counselors, the Connecticut
Counselors Association, who
said we hear about the results
that you're getting.
Teach us what you're doing.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>NICK: We've
trained over 120, I
think at this point,
psychologists, counselors,
therapists in the town.
Our model is to not--
we can't handle all
the work ourselves--
it's to train the people
in the front lines who
are doing this work.
And now, we're finding,
because sadly, the existing
tools that are in
place just don't
work for this level of trauma.
>>LISA: The tapping is
very effective for PTSD.
There's a whole study that's
been done about it at Harvard,
right?
>>NICK: Yeah.
>>LISA: Oh, Dawson
Church did it.
>>NICK: Yeah, Dawson
And it's showing very
clearly that it's getting
to the root of this trauma.
And that's why
we're being called
in by the traditional
therapists who are saying, look,
we've been doing our best,
and well-intentioned,
we're doing our best, but
nobody is getting better.
And in fact, people
are getting worse.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>NICK: So we're excited--
not that people are
getting worse, obviously--
but that people are recognizing
that the tapping can help.
So making a lot of progress.
>>LISA: And now how
did you meet Scarlett?
>>NICK: So Scarlett Lewis,
who has become a dear friend,
she lost her son, Jesse, in the
shooting-- six-year-old Jesse.
This brave, brave boy.
It came out afterwards
that he yelled
run when Adam Lanza's gun
jammed and saved six kids
and it's in the police report.
>>LISA: How did they know that?
>>NICK: He was he was
in the classroom--
because the kids
that ran survived
and said that it
was Jesse who knew,
at some level,
what was going on.
You know, Scarlett always
says that he's super smart kid
and with it and just--
>>LISA: Six?
>>NICK: Six, yeah.
He knew that-- and he yelled
run when people were frozen.
And six kids lived
and he didn't make it.
We were introduced to
Scarlett about a month
after the shooting
through a mutual friend.
And again, Scarlett
had been trying
a lot of different things.
Well-intentioned people
giving horrible advice often.
She said she met with
someone and they said,
I lost my son 14 years ago.
And she said, oh my
gosh, I'm so sorry.
And she said, and you will
never feel better again.
In that moment of tragedy,
in the moment of despair,
isn't helpful, as
well-intentioned
as it might be.
>>LISA: So she wrote a
book about her experience.
What was the story?
>>NICK: Well, she had incredible
experiences after Jessie died,
things like finding a
chalkboard in her house.
She had this big,
long chalkboard,
which I've seen in person,
and on it scribbled,
they found weeks later, it
said nurturing, healing, love
written by Jessie, at
some point, weeks earlier.
And you see very clearly
it's spelled phonetically.
It's not spelled right.
It's in his handwriting.
>>LISA: Yeah, let's take
a look at this, actually.
Take a look at this
trailer here of the book.
>>MAN: We have so
many reasons to have
the hearts filled with pain
in the world we live in.
And there is a woman here
in the audience today
who is the mother of a
little boy named Jessie
who was shot down in
Newtown, Connecticut just
a few months ago.
She has such an
amazing story to tell
and has decided that
she is not going
to have pain in her heart.
This is Scarlett Lewis,
ladies and gentlemen.
[APPLAUSE]
>>SCARLETT LEWIS:
Thank you very much.
I love talking about Jesse.
I speak of Jesse in
the present tense,
because I feel him all
around me, all the time.
When I was at the
firehouse, that day,
waiting for my
child to come to me,
and all the other
children had come and gone
with their parents, and there
were a few of us waiting,
we were scared.
And you kept holding out hope.
But when I began to
realize what had happened,
I knew in my heart that Jesse
had done something brave,
that if he was in spirit, he
had died trying to save someone.
So I carry this with me.
And I stayed at my mom's
for a couple of weeks.
It was too painful
to go to my own house
with all the memories of Jesse.
And about two weeks
after I was there,
I noticed writing on my
chalkboard in my kitchen.
I don't know when
Jesse had written it,
but it was shortly
before he died.
And it says, nurturing,
healing, love.
So it's phonetically spelled.
[LAUGHING]
Yeah.
And written like a
six-year-old would write.
But it very clearly says
nurturing, healing, love.
I feel like that's
a message for me,
a message for my
family and friends,
but also for the world.
Look at how everybody
responded to this tragedy.
It was in love, an
outpouring of love.
Sandy Hook chooses love.
And now I feel like his spirit
is with me all the time.
I feel him all around.
And what a blessing it is for
me that I can see those gifts
and I can accept them, and know
that he served his purpose,
and he's here and
in heaven and whole.
>>LISA: How did
you meet Scarlett?
>>NICK: Just through
a mutual friend.
And actually, Scarlett
had, surprisingly,
listened to a tapping world
summit a couple of years
earlier.
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>NICK: She was
familiar with tapping.
And when a friend said Nick
Ortner lives in Newtown,
she said, oh, my gosh.
And I was there with Dr.
Leyden just later that night.
It was like a rainy
Tuesday night,
and we were just in her home
and actually tapped together
that night, and have
worked together since.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
Now, her son-- and this story
has always impacted me--
they were rushing or late
or something that morning?
>>NICK: Yeah, so they
were rushing to school,
as often happens I'm sure with a
six-year-old, and Jesse wrote--
it was December 14th, so
it's cold in Connecticut--
and he wrote in the frost
of the car, I love you
and it had all these hearts.
And she said, even though we're
late, I got to get the camera.
I got to get a picture.
And that was the last
picture she took of him.
>>LISA: Oh my god.
>>NICK: Right next
to I love you.
>>LISA: I can't imagine.
And as strong as she
is and the story is--
you said a story of hope.
>>NICK: Yeah.
I know a lot of people--
I'm so passionate about this
book because-- her book--
"Nurturing, Healing, Love,"
because it's a story of hope
and know people
are scared of it.
Because it's like, I
can't even think about it.
>>LISA: Imagine.
>>NICK: I can't even imagine.
And I know there's
so much trauma there.
But when you read the book,
you definitely shed tears.
But at the end, I
think that there's
an awareness, a connection.
>>LISA: Maybe some
understanding.
>>NICK: An
understanding of what's
going on here, and a deeper
understanding, and hope,
and nurturing, and
healing, and love.
>>LISA: Well, you
are an inspiration
to so many people
with what you've
done in terms of bringing
tapping into the mainstream.
Now that we see how
it's working practically
in the communities with deep
trauma, and also for someone
like me with
congestion, it works
in so many different ways.
And it's one of those
things, just try it.
Try it.
There's no side effects.
>>NICK: Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
>>LISA: That's the
beautiful thing.
And the difference that
it makes in people's lives
is incredible.
>>NICK: And it's so easy to use.
Experience it for a few minutes.
You can use it with
friends, family, kids.
It's so applicable.
It's a really powerful tool.
>>LISA: And
hopefully, in the show
you saw, the history of it,
what to do, how to do it.
You've seen it work on me.
You saw it work on other people.
And the inspiration that
you've given us is wonderful.
So thank you so much
for being with me today.
>>NICK: Thank you, Lisa.
Thanks for having me.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And thank you so much
for being with me.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Nick Ortner or share
it with your friends,
go to GaiamTV.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]